---
layout: post
title: "Arquillian Ajocado 1.0.0.CR2 Released"
tags: [ arquillian, ajocado, richfaces, testing, richfaces-selenium ]
---

**RichFaces-Selenium** project was re-factored to new structure, it had underwent peer-reviews and documentation efforts and as what is most important, it has moved under Arquillian project as extension called Ajocado /ˈeɪdʒəˈkɑːdəʊ/.<div>
</div><div>And... **Arquillian Ajocado 1.0.0.CR2** has been released!</div><div>
</div><div><span class="Apple-style-span"  style="font-size:180%;">Introducing Ajocado</span></div><div>
</div><div>Ajocado (formerly known as <span style="font-weight: bold;">RichFaces-Selenium</span>) has obviously exceeded the initiative which it has been formerly intended for</div><div>
</div><div>RichFaces-Selenium has been integrated with **Arquillian** and its very own **Drone** extension to enable advanced lifecycle management which these projects offers.</div><div>
</div><div>The move is really significant, because it is now obvious that project has developed to full-featured wrapper for Selenium 1.x API.</div><div>
</div><div><span class="Apple-style-span"  style="font-size:180%;">Where it is deployed already?</span></div><div>
</div><div>Ajocado is now used by some other teams across <span style="font-weight: bold;">JBoss Quality Assurance department</span>, namely for testing of <span style="font-weight: bold;">Seam</span>, <span style="font-weight: bold;">Portal</span>, <span style="font-weight: bold;">Spring</span>, <span style="font-weight: bold;">GWT</span> and <span style="font-weight: bold;">Struts</span> (<a href="http://www.jboss.com/products/wfk/"><span style="font-weight: bold;">Web Framework Kit</span></a>) and it is considered to be used for automation of functional test suites of other projects.</div><div>
</div><div>But from the stand-point from team, where initial ideas had grown - RichFaces -  Ajocado is the project which<a href="http://relation.to/18902.lace"> enabled automation of its functional test suite</a> (counting 2350 unique tests) for this UI component suite.</div><div>
</div><div><span class="Apple-style-span"  style="font-size:180%;">Why it matters?</span></div><div>
</div><div>Why the new wrapper for Selenium 1.x matters? You can read more in introduction in <a href="https://docs.jboss.org/author/display/ARQAJO/Home">Ajocado project documentation</a>:</div>
<span style="font-family:courier new;"></span><blockquote  style="font-family:trebuchet ms;">Ajocado project is designed as enhancement of Selenium project focused on <span style="font-weight: bold;">rapid development</span> and <span style="font-weight: bold;">usability</span> in Java environment.
<ul><li>API is <span style="font-weight: bold;">straightforward</span> and enforces tester to write <span style="font-weight: bold;">Ajax-enabled</span> tests,</li><li>internals enables <span style="font-weight: bold;">JQuery location strategy</span>, which improves performance of the tests,</li><li>brings concepts for on-the-fly injection of own <span style="font-weight: bold;">selenium extensions</span> and also <span style="font-weight: bold;">extensions to page code</span> (enabling advanced testing features)</li><li>allows <span style="font-weight: bold;">command interception</span> and <span style="font-weight: bold;">request interception</span>,</li><li>it brings <span style="font-weight: bold;">type-safe</span> equivalent of Selenium version 1.x, enabling auto-completion and rapid development style,</li><li>integrates with <span style="font-weight: bold;">Arquillian</span> using <span style="font-weight: bold;">Arquillian Drone</span> extension.</li></ul>With all the concepts above, Ajocado brings new power to space of enterprise Java-based testing.
<div><span style="font-size:180%;">
</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span"  style="font-size:180%;">Release Candidate 2</span></div><div><span class="Apple-style-span">
</span></div><div>Second release candidate was lead in spirit of stabilization, component upgrades and finishing documentation - you may also want to review <a href="https://issues.jboss.org/secure/ReleaseNote.jspa?projectId=12311170&version=12318054">complete release notes</a>.

<span style="font-size:180%;">Future</span>

We would like to introduce support for <span style="font-weight: bold;">Selenium 2 API</span> and migrate more cool features which can be seen not only in RichFaces test suite... just stay tuned. ;-)
</div><div>
</div><div>
</div>
