---
layout: post
title: "Speaking at JDC'12 in Cairo, Egypt"
tags: [ event, cdk, jug, conference, forge, arquillian, richfaces, aerogear ]
---

<div dir="ltr" style="text-align: left;" trbidi="on">
I'm speaking at <a href="http://jdc2012.egjug.org/">JAVA Developer Conference 2012</a> held at March 9-10th in Cairo, Egypt.

I will give there 3 talks on my favorite topics: a web development with JBoss technologies and a testing.

h4. "The Gear You Need To Go Mobile With Java Enterprise":http://jdc2012.egjug.org/session/gear_you_need_go_mobile_java_enterprise

In the first talk, I'm going to cover what could the Java enterprise offer you in days of a rising mobile platform.

h4. "A Rapid JSF Component Development with RichFaces CDK":http://jdc2012.egjug.org/session/rapid_jsf_component_development_richfaces_cdk

The second talk introduces RichFaces Component Development Kit as the tool to cover the space where JSF2 falls short - custom component development.

h4. "Arquillian: Effective Tests from the Client to the Server":http://jdc2012.egjug.org/session/arquillian_helping_developers_and_qa_get_along_and_get_apps_covered

The last talk is about the latest movements in the space of a testing revolution started when Arquillian decided to save the earth. I will focus specifically on testing an integration of the client and the server.


My JBoss fellow, Koen Aers,&nbsp;will be also presenting there and he covers lot of interesting stuff: **JBoss Tools**,** Forge **and** Arquillian** (yeah, Ike invades Egypt!). Let's <a href="http://jdc2012.egjug.org/sessions">checkout his and other sessions</a>.

The event haven't started yet, but it's already looking like great event, I'm looking forward to see you there!</div>
